"I am the letter ``A'' among the alphabets, among the compound words I am the dual compound, I am the endless time, I am the sustainer of all, and have faces on all sides (or I am omniscient)."
"The live in wisdom who see themselves in all and all in them, who have renounced every selfish desire and sense craving tormenting the heart."
"When you move amidst the world of sense, free from attachment and aversion alike, there comes the peace in which all sorrows end, and you life in the wisdom of the Self."
"Action should culminate in wisdom."
"Arjuna saw the entire universe, divided in many ways, but standing as [all in] One [and One in all] in the body of Krishna, the God of gods."
"I believe You are the imperishable, the Supreme to be realized. You are the ultimate resort of the universe."
"Your powerful radiance is burning the entire universe, and filling it with splendor, O Krishna."
"There is nothing higher than Brahman. Everything in the universe is strung on Brahman like jewels on the thread of a necklace."
"He from whom all beings originate, and by whom all this universe is pervaded; worshipping Him by performing one's natural duty for Him one attains perfection."
"This being the case; the ignorant person who considers oneself as the sole agent due to imperfect understanding does not understand."
"Success in work comes quickly in this human world."
"Bodies of the eternal, imperishable, and incomprehensible soul are said to be perishable. Therefore, fight, O Arjuna."
"The wise should work without attachment, for the welfare of the society."
"Even if one is the most sinful of all sinners, yet one shall cross over the ocean of sin by the raft of knowledge alone."
"Living creatures are nourished by food, and food is nourished by rain; rain itself is the water of life, which comes from selfless worship and service."
"One feels infinite bliss that is perceivable only through the intellect, and is beyond the reach of the senses. After realizing Brahman, one is never separated from absolute reality."
"A person who has subdued the senses and completely renounced [the fruits of] all works, dwells happily in the City of Nine Gates, neither performing nor directing action."
"He who considers this [Self ] as a slayer or he who thinks that this [Self] is slain, neither of these knows the Truth. For it does not slay, nor is it slain."
"Established in Self-Realization, one is not moved even by the greatest calamity."
"The yogi who diligently strives, perfecting [gradually] through many incarnations, becomes completely free from all sins and reaches the Self-realization."
"As the all-pervading ether is not tainted because of its subtlety, similarly the Self, seated in everybody, is not tainted."
"After Self-Realization , one does not regard any other gain superior to Self-Realization."
"The one who rejoices in the Self only, who is satisfied with the Self, who is content in the Self alone, for such a [Self-realized] person there is no duty."
"All these (seekers) are indeed noble, but I regard the wise as My very Self, because the one who is steadfast becomes one with the Supreme Being."
"Today I have described the same ancient science to you, because you are my sincere devotee and friend. Karma-yoga is a supreme secret indeed."
"Thus handed down in succession the royal sages knew this (Karma-yoga). After a long time the science of Karma-yoga was lost from this earth."
"Thus this most secret science has been explained by Me, O sinless Arjuna. Having understood this, one becomes enlightened and one's all duties are accomplished."
"Thus many types of sacrifice are described in the Vedas. Know them all to be born from Karma or the action of body, mind, and senses. Knowing this, you shall attain nirvana."
"After realizing Brahman, one is never separated from absolute reality."
"Fear not what is not real, never was and never will be. What is real, always was and cannot be destroyed."
"Some offer their wealth, their austerity, and their practice of yoga as sacrifice, while the ascetics with strict vows offer their study of scriptures and knowledge as sacrifice."
"I am the power of rulers, the statesmanship of the seekers of victory."
"The pleasure one enjoys from [spiritual] practice results in cessation of sorrow."
"The one who shall propagate this supreme secret philosophy amongst My devotees, shall be performing the highest devotional service to Me and shall certainly attain Me."
"The yogi who knows all this goes beyond getting the benefits of the study of the Vedas, performance of sacrifices, austerities, and charities, and attains the Supreme eternal abode."
"Scarcely one out of thousands of persons strives for perfection of Self-realization."
"Such a person soon becomes righteous and attains everlasting peace. Be aware, O Arjuna, that My devotee never falls down."
"Little by little, through patience and repeated effort, the mind will become stilled in the Self."
"One is considered the best yogi who regards every being like oneself, and who can feel the pain and pleasures of others as one's own."
"The senses have been conditioned by attraction to the pleasant and aversion to the unpleasant: a man should not be ruled by them; they are obstacles in his path."
"Smoke, night, the dark lunar fortnight, and the six months of southern solstice of the sun; departing by these paths, the righteous person attains lunar light (or heaven) and reincarnates."
"Persons of demonic nature do not know what to do and what not to do. They neither have purity nor good conduct nor truthfulness."
"I look upon all creatures equally; none are less dear to me and none more dear. But those who worship me with love live in me, and I come to life in them."
"People do not know My true transcendental nature. Therefore, they fall."
"One's inferior natural work is better than superior unnatural work. One who does the work ordained by one's inherent nature incurs no sin."
"I am the supporter of the universe, the father, the mother, and the grandfather."
"The serenity of mind, gentleness, silence, self-restraint, and the purity of mind are called the austerity of thought."
"Yoga is difficult for the one whose mind is not subdued."
"The mind alone is one's friend as well as one's enemy."
"I am easily attainable, O Arjuna, by that ever steadfast yogi who always thinks of Me and whose mind does not go elsewhere."
"By always keeping the mind fixed on the Self, the yogi whose mind is subdued attains peace of the Supreme nirvana by uniting with Me."
"In My opinion, yoga is difficult for the one whose mind is not subdued. However, yoga is attainable by the person of subdued mind by striving through proper means."
"Sitting and concentrating the mind on a single object, controlling the thoughts and the activities of the senses, let the yogi practice meditation for self-purification."
"Because the mind, indeed, is very unsteady, turbulent, powerful, and obstinate, O Krishna. I think restraining the mind is as difficult as restraining the wind."
"They, whose mind and intellect are absorbed in the Self, who remain firmly attached with the Self, who have Self as their supreme goal, whose sins have been destroyed by the knowledge, do not take birth again."
"What is work and what is not work are questions that perplex the wisest of men."
"I am the origin of all. Everything emanates from Me. Understanding this, the wise ones worship Me with love and devotion."
"I give the knowledge, to those who are ever united with Me and lovingly adore Me."
"Among the knowledge I am knowledge of the supreme Self. I am logic of the logician."
"Better indeed is knowledge than mechanical practice. Better than knowledge is meditation. But better still is surrender of attachment to results, because there follows immediate peace."
"But, those who carp at My teaching and do not practice it, consider them as ignorant of all knowledge, senseless, and lost."
"Those who are devoid of attachment, whose mind is fixed in knowledge, all deeds of such liberated persons dissolves away."
"A yogi is called Self-realized who is satisfied with knowledge and understanding of the Self."
"Knowledge is better than mere ritualistic practice, meditation is better than mere knowledge, renunciation of the fruit of work is better than meditation, peace immediately follows the renunciation of (the attachment to) the fruit of work."
"Seers whose sins (or imperfections) are destroyed, whose doubts have been dispelled by knowledge, whose disciplined minds are attached with the Self, and who are engaged in the welfare of all beings attain Supreme Brahman."
"The knowledge sacrifice is superior to any material sacrifice."
"Knowing that, O Arjuna, you shall not again get deluded like this. By this knowledge you shall behold the entire creation in your own Self/Lord, or in Brahman."
"Verily there is no purifier in this world like knowledge. One who becomes purified by Karma-yoga discovers this knowledge within (naturally) in course of time. (See also 4.31, and 5.06)."
"Those who have taken refuge in this knowledge attain unity with Me, and are neither born at the time of creation nor afflicted at the time of dissolution."
"Four types of virtuous ones worship or seek Me, O Arjuna. They are: the distressed, the seeker of Self-knowledge, the seeker of wealth, and the wise one who knows the Supreme."
"Some worship Me by knowledge sacrifice. Others worship the infinite as the one in all [or non-dual], as the master of all [or dual], and in various other ways."
"Learn from Me briefly, O Arjuna, how one who has attained such perfection realizes Brahman, the supreme state of knowledge."
"Verily there is no purifier in this world like knowledge."
"Thus the knowledge that is more secret than the secret has been explained to you by Me. After fully reflecting on this, do as you wish."
"This knowledge is the king of all knowledge, is the most secret, is very sacred, it can be perceived by instinct, conforms to Dharma, is very easy to practice, and is imperishable."
"Undivided, yet appears as if divided in beings; He, the object of knowledge, is the creator, sustainer, and destroyer of (all) beings."
"Knowledge is better than mere ritualistic practice."
"What is the need for this detailed knowledge, O Arjuna? I continually support the entire universe by a small fraction of My energy."
"The one by whom others are not agitated, and who is not agitated by others; who is free from joy, envy, fear, and anxiety; is also dear to Me."
"A person whose mind is unattached to sensual pleasures, who discovers the joy of the Self, and whose mind is in union with Brahman through meditation, enjoys eternal bliss."
"It is better to do one's own duty, however defective it may be, than to follow the duty of another, however well one may perform it. He who does his duty as his own nature reveals it, never sins."
"Know Me to be the eternal seed of all creatures. I am the intelligence of the intelligent, and the brilliance of the brilliant."
"The sage awakes to light in the night of all creatures. That which the world calls day is the night of ignorance to the wise."
"The unsuccessful yogi is reborn, after attaining heaven and living there for many years, in the house of the pure and prosperous."
"That one I love who is incapable of ill will, and returns love for hatred. Living beyond the reach of I and mind, and of pain and pleasure, full of mercy, contented, self-controlled, with all his heart and all his mind given to Me -- with such a one I am in love."
"That one I love who is incapable of ill will, and returns love for hatred. Living beyond the reach of I and mind, and of pain and pleasure, full of mercy, contented, self-controlled, with all his heart and all his mind given to Me / with such a one I am in love."
"One who does not hate any creature, who is friendly and compassionate, free from (the notion of) ``I'' and ``my'', even-minded in pain and pleasure, forgiving; and / The yogi who is ever content, who has subdued the mind, whose resolve is firm, whose mind and intellect are engaged in dwelling upon Me; such a devotee is dear to Me."
"Neither in this world nor elsewhere is there any happiness in store for him who always doubts."
"The foods that promote longevity, virtue, strength, health, happiness, and joy; are juicy, smooth, substantial, and agreeable to the stomach."
"One who finds happiness with the Self, who rejoices the Self within, and who is illuminated by the Self-knowledge; such a yogi attains supreme nirvana."
"You grieve for those who are not worthy of grief, and yet speak the words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead."
"Alas! We are ready to commit a great sin by striving to slay our kinsmen because of greed for the pleasures of the kingdom."
"Whatever I am offered in devotion with a pure heart -- a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water -- I accept with joy."
"To the illumined man or woman, a clod of dirt, a stone, and gold are the same."
"God is in everything as well as above everything."
"They say that the world is unreal, without a substratum, without a God, and without an order."
"Wearing divine garlands and apparel, anointed with celestial perfumes and ointments, full of all wonders, the limitless God with faces on all sides."
"Having abandoned attachment to the fruits of work, ever content, and dependent on no one [but God]; though engaged in activity, one does nothing at all."
"Steadfastness in knowledge of the Supreme Spirit, and the perception of [the omnipresent God as] the object of true knowledge is called knowledge; what is contrary to this is ignorance."
"O Krishna, I have heard from You in detail about the origin and dissolution of beings, and Your imperishable glory."
"Whatever is endowed with glory, brilliance, and power; know that to be a manifestation of a fraction of My splendor."
"No one attains perfection by merely giving up work."
"I know, O Arjuna, the beings of the past, of the present, and those of the future, but no one really knows Me."
"One does not attain freedom from the bondage of Karma by merely abstaining from work. No one attains perfection by merely giving up work."
"A person is said to have achieved yoga, the union with the Self, when the perfectly disciplined mind gets freedom from all desires, and becomes absorbed in the Self alone."
"He is not elevated by good fortune or depressed by bad. His mind is established in God, and he is free from delusion."
"Brahman is the oblation. Brahman is the clarified butter. The oblation is poured by Brahman into the fire of Brahman. Brahman shall be realized by the one who considers everything as (a manifestation or) an act of Brahman."
"Fire, light, daytime, the bright lunar fortnight, and the six months of the northern solstice of the sun; departing by the path of these gods the yogis, who know Brahman, attain nirvana."
"The sun does not illumine there, nor the moon, nor the fire. That is My supreme abode. Having reached there they do not come back."
"As the blazing fire reduces wood to ashes, similarly, the fire of Self-knowledge reduces all Karma to ashes."
"When the senses contact sense objects, a person experiences cold or heat, pleasure or pain. These experiences are fleeting they come and go. Bear them patiently."
"I am delighted by beholding that which has never been seen before, and yet my mind is tormented with fear."
"Some philosophers say that all work is full of faults and should be given up, while others say that acts of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned."
"Seeing fathers-in-law, all those kinsmen, and other dear ones standing in the ranks of the two armies, / Arjuna was overcome with great compassion and sorrowfully said: O Krishna, seeing my kinsmen standing with a desire to fight, / My limbs fail and my mouth becomes dry. My body quivers and my hairs stand on end."
"When meditation is mastered, the mind is unwavering like the flame of a lamp in a windless place."
"A person is known by the faith."
"Whoever hears this with faith and without cavil becomes free from sin, and attains heaven (or the higher regions for those whose actions are pure)."
"Those who always practice this teaching of Mine, with faith and free from cavil, are freed from the bondage of Karma."
"Even those devotees who worship demigods with faith, they too worship Me, but in an improper way."
"But those devotees who have faith and sincerely try to develop the above mentioned immortal virtues, and set Me as their supreme goal; are very dear to Me."
"Whosoever desires to worship whatever deity with faith, I make their faith steady in that very deity."
"Endowed with steady faith they worship that deity, and fulfill their wishes through that deity. Those wishes are, indeed, granted only by Me."
"The one who has faith, and is sincere, and has mastery over the senses, gains this knowledge. Having gained this, one at once attains the supreme peace."
"I consider one to be the most devoted of all the yogis who lovingly contemplates on Me with supreme faith."
"On this path effort never goes to waste, and there is no failure. Even a little effort toward spiritual awareness will protect you from the greatest fear."
"Seeing Your great effulgent and various-colored form touching the sky; Your mouth wide open and large shining eyes; I am frightened and find neither peace nor courage, O Krishna."
"One who neither rejoices nor grieves, neither likes nor dislikes, who has renounced both the good and the evil, and who is full of devotion, such a person is dear to Me."
"Anybody, including women, merchants, laborers, and the evil-minded can attain the supreme goal by just surrendering unto My will [with loving devotion]."
"The evil doers, the ignorant, the lowest persons who are attached to demonic nature, and whose intellect has been taken away by Maya do not worship or seek Me."
"Everything has been accomplished in this very life by those whose mind is set in equality."
"One who does not envy but us a compassionate friend to all ... such a devotee is very dear to Me."
"Know that all creatures have evolved from this twofold energy, and Brahman is the origin as well as the dissolution of the entire universe."
"Conquer your enemies and enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these [warriors] have already been destroyed by Me. You are only an instrument, O Arjuna."
"If due to ego you think: I shall not fight; this resolve of yours is vain. Your own nature will compel you."
"Entering the earth I support all beings with My energy; becoming the sap-giving moon I nourish all the plants."
"The ancient seekers of liberation also performed their duties with this understanding. Therefore, you should do your duty as the ancients did."
"Therefore, always remember Me and do your duty. You shall certainly attain Me if your mind and intellect are fixed on Me."
"You should perform your duty [with apathetic frame of mind]  with a view to guide people and for the universal welfare."
"Always perform your duty efficiently and without attachment to the results, because by doing work without attachment one attains the Supreme."
"Karma does not bind one who has renounced work (by renouncing the fruits of work) through Karma-yoga; whose doubt is completely destroyed by knowledge; and who is Self-realized, O Arjuna."
"Therefore, resort to Karma-yoga and cut the ignorance-born doubt abiding in your heart by the sword of Self-knowledge, and get up (to fight), O Arjuna."
"In Karma-yoga no effort is ever lost, and there is no harm. Even a little practice of this discipline protects one from great fear [of birth and death]."
"Sever the ignorant doubt in your heart with the sword of self-knowledge. Observe your discipline. Arise."
"The resolute determination [of Self-realization] is not formed in the minds of those who are attached to pleasure and power; and whose discernment is obscured by such [ritualistic] activities."
"The desire for sensual pleasures fades away if one abstains from sense enjoyment, but the craving  [for sense enjoyment] remains. The craving also disappears from the one who has seen [or known] the Supreme."
"Works do not bind Me, because I have no desire for the fruits of work."
"This has been gained by me today, I shall fulfill this desire, this is mine and this wealth also shall be mine in the future."
"A person is said to have attained yogic perfection when there is no desire for sensual pleasures, or attachment to the fruits of work, and has renounced all personal selfish motives."
"Dedicating all works to Me in a spiritual frame of mind, free from desire, attachment, and mental grief, do your duty."
"I desire neither victory nor pleasure nor kingdom, O Krishna. What is the use of the kingdom, or enjoyment, or even life, O Krishna?"
"Treating pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat alike, engage yourself in your duty. By doing your duty this way you will not incur sin."
"The light of all lights, He is said to be beyond darkness. He is the knowledge, the object of knowledge, and seated in the hearts of all beings, He is to be realized by the knowledge."
"The light of all lights, He is said to be beyond darkness."
"The path of light and the path of darkness [of materialism and ignorance] are thought to be the world's two eternal paths."
"It is better to do thine own duty, however lacking in merit, than to do that of another, even though efficiently. It is better to die doing one's own duty, for to do the duty of another is fraught with danger."
"O Arjuna, now behold the entire creation; animate, inanimate, and whatever else you like to see; all at one place in My body."
"just as one sun illuminates this entire world, similarly the creator illumines [or gives life to] the entire creation."
"Know Me to be the creator of all creation."
"The one who does not help to keep the wheel of creation in motion by sacrificial duty, and who rejoices in sense pleasures, that sinful person lives in vain."
"Thus the creation as well as the knowledge and the object of knowledge have been briefly described. Understanding this, My devotee attains Me."
"These acts of creation do not bind Me, O Arjuna, because I remain indifferent and unattached to those acts."
"Having hands and feet everywhere; having eyes, head, and face everywhere; having ears everywhere; the creator exists in the creation by pervading everything."
"What the creation is, what it is like, what its transformations are, where the source is, who that creator is, and what His powers are, hear all these from Me in brief."
"But great souls, who possess divine qualities know Me as the cause of creation and imperishable, and worship Me single-mindedly."
"Using My nature I create, again and again, the entire multitude of beings that are helpless, being under the control of nature."
"A disciplined person, enjoying sense objects with senses that are under control and free from likes and dislikes, attains tranquillity."
"Let the yogi seated in solitude and alone having mind and senses under control and free from desires and attachments for possessions, try constantly to contemplate on the Supreme Self."
"A man's own self is his friend. A man's own self is his foe."
"Out of compassion I destroy the darkness of their ignorance. From within them I light the lamp of wisdom and dispel all darkness from their lives."
"Out of compassion for them I, who dwell within their heart, destroy the darkness born of ignorance by the shining lamp of knowledge."
"My illusion is dispelled by Your profound words, that You spoke out of compassion towards me, about the supreme secret of the Self."
"Neither by study of the Vedas, nor by austerity, nor by charity, nor by ritual, can I be seen in this form as you have seen Me."
"Various types of sacrifice, charity, and austerity are performed by the seekers of nirvana by uttering 'TAT' [or He is all] without seeking a reward."
"The food preferred by all is also of three types. So are the sacrifice, austerity, and charity."
"The body is mortal, but the person dwelling in the body is immortal and immeasurable."
"The embodied one within the body of everyone, O Bharata, is ever undestroyable. Therefore you should not grieve for any being."
"My limbs fail and my mouth becomes dry. My body quivers and my hairs stand on end."
"Remembering whatever object one leaves the body at the end of life, one attains that object, O Arjuna, because of the constant thought of that object (one remembers that object at the end of life and achieves it)."
"This body [the miniature universe] may be called the field or creation. One who knows the creation is called the creator by the seers of truth."
"After taking such a birth, O Arjuna, one regains the knowledge acquired in the previous life, and strives again to achieve perfection."
"If you think that this (body) takes birth and dies perpetually, even then, O Arjuna, you should not grieve like this."
"The one who truly understands My transcendental birth and activities, is not born again after leaving this body and attains My abode."
"Neither do I see the beginning nor the middle nor the end of Your Universal Form."
"Pleasures derived from the contact of senses with their objects are verily the source of misery, and have a beginning and an end."
"This pleasure, appears as poison in the beginning but is like nectar in the end, comes by the grace of Self-knowledge."
"Let the scripture be your authority in determining what should be done and what should not be done. You should perform your duty following the scriptural injunction."
"Valor, glory, firmness, skill, generosity, steadiness in battle and ability to rule -- these constitute the duty of a soldier. They flow from his own nature."
"Whatever you do, make it an offering to me -- the food you eat, the sacrifices you make, the help you give, even your suffering."
"The non permanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of summer and winter seasons."
"A Self-realized person who is free from lust and anger, and who has subdued the mind and senses easily attains nirvana."
"He who, before he leaves his body, learns to surmount the promptings of desire and anger is a saint and is happy."
"Delusion arises from anger. The mind is bewildered by delusion. Reasoning is destroyed when the mind is bewildered. One falls down when reasoning is destroyed."
"Hypocrisy, arrogance, pride, anger, harshness, and ignorance; these are the marks of those who are born with demonic qualities, O Arjuna."
"Governing sense, mind and intellect, intent on liberation, free from desire, fear and anger, the sage is forever free."
"Freed from attachment, fear, and anger; fully absorbed in Me, taking refuge in Me, and purified by the fire of Self-knowledge, many have attained Me."
"Bound by hundreds of ties of desire and enslaved by lust and anger; they strive to obtain wealth by unlawful means for the fulfillment of desires."
"With senses, mind, and intellect under control; having liberation as the prime goal; free from lust, anger, and fear; such a sage is verily liberated."
"Even these [obligatory] works should be performed without attachment to the fruits. This is My definite supreme advice, O Arjuna."
"Action is the product of the Qualities inherent in Nature."
"No one becomes a Karma-yogi who has not renounced the selfish motive behind an action."
"Whatever action, whether right or wrong, one performs by thought, word, and deed; these are its five causes."
"Faith in sacrifice, charity, and austerity is also called SAT. The action for the sake of the Supreme is verily termed as SAT."
"A Karma-yogi performs action by body, mind, intellect, and senses, without attachment (or ego), only for self-purification."
"The true nature of action is very difficult to understand. Therefore, one should know the nature of attached action, the nature of detached action, and also the nature of forbidden action."
"Detached action is unselfish work."
"Attached action is selfish work that produces Karmic bondage."
"Free from desires, mind and senses under control, renouncing all proprietorship, doing mere bodily action, one does not incur sin (or Karmic reaction)."
"Even the wise are confused about what is action and what is inaction."
"A man who sees action in inaction and inaction in action has understanding among men and discipline in all action he performs."
"Perform your obligatory duty, because action is indeed better than inaction."
"The deluded ones, who restrain their organs of action but mentally dwell upon the sense enjoyment, are called hypocrites."
"Your enemies will speak many unmentionable words and scorn your ability. What could be more painful than this? / You will go to heaven if killed, or you will enjoy the earth if victorious. Therefore, get up with a determination to fight, O Arjuna."
"Valour, glory, firmness, skill, generosity, steadiness in battle and ability to rule - these constitute the duty of a soldier. They flow from his own nature."
